---
title: 'Nuxt: Is it that good?'
cover:
  url: 'https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/23360933'
  alt: 'Nuxt'
banner:
  url: 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nuxt/nuxt/master/.github/assets/banner.svg'
  alt: 'Nuxt'
tags:
  - Nuxt
  - Vue
publishedAt: 'Wed, 21 Feb 2024'
---

I've been playing around with [Nuxt](https://nuxt.com) for a while now (for
approximately 4 or 5 months), using it to build a few different personal
projects and recently I started using it at my current internship. I've been
really impressed with how easy is some things that are usually "hard" to do
with the concurrent framework [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/). I don't have any
proof of this, but I think that the name "Nuxt" comes from the junction of
"Next" and "Vue", probably this is not the case, but it would be cool if it
was.

One of the things that Nuxt got right is the number of pre-configured modules
that you can simply add to your project and use it out of the box. For example,
I've been using the `@nuxt/content` module to create this blog and it's been
a really nice experience so far: I can write my posts in Markdown and it's
automatically converted to HTML with very little configuration. The same goes
for the `@nuxt/tailwindcss` module, which it is very plug-and-play — you just
need to install it, add it to the `modules` array in your `nuxt.config.ts` and
it's ready to use. This can be a killer feature for some people, especially for
companies that need to deliver projects fast and don't have time to configure
everything from scratch.

The big issue that I see with Nuxt is that people are not much familiar with
Vue. There is less content, libraries and tools for Vue than for React and this
can slow down the development process of some projects. If I remember
correctly, there **is** a way to use React components in Nuxt using
[plugins](https://nuxt.com/docs/guide/directory-structure/plugins), but
the process is not as straightforward as using Vue components. This can be a
problem for some people, but I think that with time this will change. Vue is a
great framework and it's getting more and more attention from the community,
this will be less of a problem in the future.

Nuxt has a lot of potential and I'm really excited to see where it goes.
